.TH LUTHER 1 "27 February 1995"
.SH NAME
luther \- The Reform Prolog emulator/interpreter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ~reform/Reform/Luther/lut
.RB "[\|" \-s "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-fs "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-p "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-fp "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-verbose "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-debug "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-memory 
.IR <nr> "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-wmemory
.IR <nr> "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-w
.IR <nr> "\|]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
\fBLuther\fR is a recursion-parallel and sequential implementation of 
Prolog in the Edinburgh tradition.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-s
Sequential Prolog with low-level debug information (wamdebug).
.TP
.B \-fs
Fast Sequential Prolog optimized for fast execution.
.TP
.B \-p
Parallel Prolog with low-level debug information (wamdebug).
.TP
.B \-fp
Fast Parallel Prolog optimized for fast execution.
.TP
.B \-verbose
Tell the system to list all predicates as they are loaded into the
program database.
.TP
.B \-debug
The Low-level debug facility is activated at start up.
.TP
.BI \-memory " bytes"
The sequential worker is given the indicated amounts of bytes
to divide between the heap, stack, trail, and code-area. The default
value is 3072000 bytes.
.TP
.BI \-wmemory " bytes"
Each worker is given the indicated amounts of bytes
to divide between its heap, stack, and trail. The default value is
1024000 bytes.
.TP
.BI \-w " nr"
The parallel Prolog system is started with the indicated number
of parallel workers. The default value is 1.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SP
.nf

 % lut -fp -memory 5120000 -wmemory 3072000 -w 10 
 Booting...wait
 Luther Reform Prolog (parallel) version 0.7, Mon Feb 27 MET DST 1995.
 Copyright (C) 1991 - 1995 Uppsala University.
 All rights reserved.
 {Started with 10 active workers}
 | ?- 

.fi
.SH FILES
The emulator consults the file ~/.lutrc.pl when booting.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR reform(1)
.PP
The Reform WWW home page: 
.nf
     http://www.csd.uu.se/~thomasl/reform.html
.fi
.PP
Technical reports available through anonymous ftp from 
.nf
     ftp.csd.uu.se.
.fi
.SH BUGS
.LP
Send bug reports to \fBreform-bugs@csd.uu.se\fR. Bugs tend actually to be
fixed if they can be isolated, so it is in your interest to report them
in such a way that they can be easily reproduced.
.SH AUTHOR
.LP
Johan Bevemyr wrote the original emulator. Patric Hedlin has helped
to debug and add functionality.
.SH COPYRIGHT
.LP
Copyright (C) 1991 - 1995, Uppsala University.
