.TH Reform Compiler
.SH reform\-compiler
Compile Reform Prolog programs for sequential or recursion-parallel
execution.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
   ~reform/bin/$MACHINE/compiler
   Reform compiler, version 1.8 of Wed Mar  8 14:13:11 MET 1995
   Report bugs to reform-bugs@csd.uu.se

   yes
.fi
.B  | ?- rcompile(
.I FileNames
).
.sp
.B  | ?- rcompile(
.I FileNames
,
.I OptionList
).
.sp
See below for the possible values of
.I $MACHINE
(specific for this installation).
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B reform-compiler
generates parallel and sequential code for the Reform Prolog system.
When started, you enter the Prolog top loop. In that mode, you can
invoke rcompile/1 or rcompile/2 as shown above. The compiled files
are emitted to a default output file ("a.wam") if no output directive
specifies otherwise.
.SH COMMAND LINE OPTIONS
The
.I FileNames
is a list of file names. Non-trivial paths means the name must be
quoted. See examples below.
The following options are supported in
.I OptionList
.sp
.TP 16
.B verbose	v
The compiler tells you what it is doing.
.TP
.B analyse	a
Turn on global analysis (this option is default).
.TP
.B numa
Produce code for machine architecture with nonuniform memory
access (this option is default).
.TP
.B named_files_only	nfo
Do not process included files (for quicker compilation). Disables
global analysis.
.TP
.B output(File)		o(File)
Produce output to File instead of to the default output file.
This option has no effect if combined with output_separate.
.TP
.B output_separate	os
The output from file.pl is emitted to file.wam. Works for multiple
files combined simultaneously.
.TP
.B output_indexing	oi
Displays indexing information for all predicates, except recursion-parallel
ones. (These do not have interesting indexing anyway.)
.TP
.B analysis_statistics	as
Give statistics of results of global analysis.
.TP
.B ascii_format		af
The code produced is emitted using a verbose ascii format (including comments).
.TP
.B byte_format		bf
The code produced is emitted using a less verbose ascii format (this option is
default). Note that we do not produce true byte code output yet.
.PP
.SH FILES
.TP 16
.B ~reform/bin/{hp,sparc}/compiler
Executable program. If you set
.B
$MACHINE
to 
.I hp 
or 
.I sparc
you can define the command as shown in the synopsis.
.TP
Reform/Benchmarks/{small,medium,large}/*.pl
Some benchmark programs.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
  | ?- rcompile([file1,'other_dir/f2','~user/prolog/f3.pl']).

  | ?- rcompile([file],[verbose,named_files_only]).

  | ?- rcompile(file1,[verbose,analysis_statistics,output_indexing]).
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR luther(1)
.PP
The Reform WWW home page: 
.nf 
     http://www.csd.uu.se/~thomasl/reform.html
.fi
.PP
Technical reports available through anonymous ftp from
.nf
     ftp.csd.uu.se.
.fi
.SH BUGS
The compiler should be part of the Luther Reform Prolog (luther(1)) package,
rather than a separate entity.
.sp
Should be tested more extensively.
.SH AUTHORS
Thomas Lindgren wrote the original compiler. Patric Hedlin and
Thomas Lindgren fixed bugs and added functionality.
